1. EC2 Basics

What is Amazon EC2? How does it differ from traditional virtual machines?
What are the different types of EC2 instance families, and how do you choose the correct instance type for your application?
Explain on-demand, reserved, and spot instances in EC2. When would you use each?
What is an AMI (Amazon Machine Image), and how is it used in EC2? Can you create a custom AMI?
it is a virtual machine for ec2 instance
it has preconfigure os, software(web server, database, java etc), preconfigure set of firewall rules.
security patch and updates
yes we can create custom images
click on ec2 instance-action-images and templates - create image
Explain the difference between public, private, and elastic IP addresses in EC2.
public ips = static through instance lifecycle running. once it is terminate new IP is assign
automatically assign by AWS
private IPs:- this are not connected to IG. it is used within VPC or used to communicate with another VPC instance(vpc peering).
useful to connect to backend service. database server
elastic ips - these are static ips which remains same regardless of instance termination configure by user manually through
AWS console, CLI and SDK
use case for disaster recovery we can easily assign this IP from one instance to another
2. EC2 Instance Scaling and High Availability -

How do you implement auto-scaling for EC2 instances? What are the main components of an Auto Scaling Group?
Explain how Elastic Load Balancers (ELB) work with EC2 instances. How do you configure health checks for the load balancer?
What are placement groups, and what different types are available (cluster, spread, partition)? When would you use each?
3. EC2 Storage

What is the difference between EBS (Elastic Block Store) and Instance Store? What are the use cases for each?
Explain the different types of EBS volumes (e.g., General Purpose SSD, Provisioned IOPS SSD, Throughput Optimized HDD, Cold HDD) and when to use them.
How do you back up EC2 instances (e.g., snapshots)? What are the best practices for EC2 backups?
How can you encrypt EBS volumes, snapshots, and AMIs?
Is it possible to attach the same EBS volume to multiple EC2 instances? If not, how can you share data across instances?
4. Networking and Security

Describe security groups and network ACLs. How are they different, and how do they work together to secure EC2 instances?
How would you troubleshoot connectivity issues in an EC2 instance (e.g., SSH access, application-level access)?
What is a bastion host and how is it implemented using EC2?
How can you enable private access to your EC2 instances using VPC, subnets, and NAT gateways?
Explain the concept of Elastic IP in EC2. When and why would you need it?
5. EC2 Optimization

How do you optimize the cost of your EC2 instances in production environments?
What are Reserved Instances, and how do they differ from Savings Plans in terms of cost optimization?
How do you monitor EC2 instances using CloudWatch Metrics and set up alarms for proactive action (e.g., CPU utilization, memory utilization)?
How do you troubleshoot performance issues on EC2 instances, such as high CPU/memory usage or I/O bottlenecks?
6. Advanced EC2 Scenarios

Explain how you can migrate an on-premises application to EC2 instances. What steps are involved in such a migration?
Describe the process of deploying an application across multiple EC2 instances in different regions for disaster recovery.
What are the differences between IPv4 and IPv6 in EC2, and how do you enable IPv6 for your instances?
How do you use EC2 instance metadata? Provide examples of its use.
Can you stop or terminate a Spot Instance and preserve its data? If so, how?

Questions on Amazon S3
1. S3 Basics

What is Amazon S3, and how does it provide scalability and durability?
What are storage classes, and how do you decide which class to use (e.g., Standard, Intelligent-Tiering, Glacier, etc.)?
Explain the key components of an S3 bucket (e.g., objects, keys, and bucket policies).
How does S3 handle data consistency for PUT and GET operations?
2. S3 Security

How would you secure your S3 bucket? Explain the use of bucket policies, ACLs, and IAM roles.
bucket polies are where we provide principles,action and resources and condition based on IP address or protocol
ACLs= object level locking where  you define Grants{
grantee: IAM user account or any other aws account
permission
}
IAM roles is assign to specific service of AWS where it can perform operation on S3
using IAM polies which include
{
version:
statement:[
effect: ALLOW/DENY,
action:
resource}]
}
What are S3 Block Public Access Settings, and when would you use them?
when we want to restrict s3 access from internet gateway. it will be accessible inside vpc
how to do it
select s3 bucket
Go to actions-> Permissions -> Block All public access -> Enable
when we want s3 to be access internally by any aws service suppose EC2 want to upload some data on s3 bucket in that case it is helpful
lambda function wants to store event result on s3 in that case it is helpful.

Explain how server-side and client-side encryption work with Amazon S3.
server-side = SSE-S3- AES256 - encryption and decryption handle by AWS
SSE-KMS- encryption and decryption handle by AWS
Client side SSE-C client will generate key and provide a key for each encryption to put data to S3 and decryption to get data from S3
we can enable server side encryption

What is an S3 Access Point, and how does it simplify access management for large-scale data lakes?
it act as a intermediatory between aws services and s3
component
Access point Name Space - basically a url for accessing s3
Access policies - Statement:[
{
effect
principle
action
resource
}]
Network origin
VPC
internet gateway.
it works well and seamlessly with aws lamda
data lakes is central repository for storing large volume of raw data so adding bucket polices for this can be complex

3. S3 Access and Data Management

How do you manage permissions for S3 objects (e.g., public vs private vs restricted access)?

Explain the function of pre-signed URLs. When would you use them, and how do they differ from bucket policies?
provide the temproray access to the bucket object
component of pre-sign
    access key and secret to authenticate the user
    object key- a resource key
    expiration time=
    HTTP method
  we can create presign url with aws cli and sdk
  aws cli
  aws s3 presign bucket-path  expiry-in
  to generate pre-sign for put need to used aws sdk

What is Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS) in S3, and how do you configure it?
How do you enable versioning in S3 buckets? What are the benefits and costs of versioning?
using AWS IAM console-> click on bucket -> go to property -> enable bucket versioning
using cli
aws apis3 --put-bucket-versioning --bucket <bucket name> --versioning-configuration ENABLE=true
4. S3 Performance

How would you optimize upload performance for large files to S3 (e.g., multipart uploads)?
How do S3 Transfer Acceleration and VPC endpoints work to improve performance?
What are Amazon S3 Batch Operations, and how do they simplify managing large-scale datasets?
5. S3 Data Lifecycle Management

How do you use lifecycle policies to automate data management in S3 (e.g., transitioning objects between storage classes)?
Compare replication options in S3 (Cross-Region Replication vs Same-Region Replication).
Describe scenarios for using S3 Object Lock to enforce data retention policies.
6. Advanced S3 Features

Explain the use of S3 Event Notifications. How can you trigger Lambda functions or SNS topics when an object is uploaded to S3?
How would you host a static website using Amazon S3? Can you configure a custom domain name for your website?
Describe how Query in Place works with tools like S3 Select and Amazon Athena.
How can you integrate Amazon S3 Glacier for long-term archival? What is the process for retrieving data?
7. Advanced S3 Scenarios

Describe a scenario where you need to handle high throughput and frequent reads from S3. How does S3 handle concurrent requests?
How do you migrate large datasets to Amazon S3? Discuss tools like AWS Snowball or AWS DataSync.
What are the tradeoffs between Amazon S3 Glacier and S3 Glacier Deep Archive?
How do you troubleshoot slow object upload/download performance in S3?
Scenario-Based Questions
For a senior-level role, you might also face real-world challenges designed to test your ability to architect and troubleshoot complex systems:

EC2 Scenarios:
"How would you design an architecture using EC2 instances to handle high availability for a web application hosted across multiple availability zones?"
"You suspect resource exhaustion (CPU or memory utilization spikes) is causing EC2 instances to fail. How do you investigate and resolve the issue?"
S3 Scenarios:
"A developer accidentally deleted critical files in an S3 bucket without versioning enabled. How do you ensure data recovery or prevent this from happening in the future?"
"You have an analytics workload storing terabytes of data in S3. How would you optimize costs while ensuring fast data retrieval for daily reports?"
Behavioral/Advanced Design Questions
"How do you balance cost, performance, and scalability when integrating EC2 and S3 for enterprise-wide solutions?"
"Have you ever implemented disaster recovery using EC2 and S3? Walk us through your approach and the specific AWS services used."
Pro Tips for Preparing
Focus on practical scenarios and best practices for EC2 and S3.
Understand architectural trade-offs for cost, scalability, and security.
Leverage hands-on experience and AWS documentation to confidently discuss implementations.
Be comfortable explaining concepts like high availability, data lifecycle management, auto-scaling, and monitoring.
With strong preparation, you'll be equipped to showcase your expertise in both EC2 and S3 for senior roles!

db sharding.