

Here is a list of questions to help you prepare for the level-up assessment for a senior software role with a focus on caching solutions. These questions cover theoretical concepts, practical knowledge, and implementation with the libraries/frameworks you mentioned.

Distributed and Local Caching Foundations:
General Questions on Caching:

What is caching, and why is it important in distributed systems?

caching is used to cache the static and most frequently used data which get change less frequently.
which improve application performance and response time.
it is important in distributed system because of fallowing
Improve performance and response time
in distributed architecture and microservice communicate with another microservice
so if we calling another microservice to get same data most of the time. then call to microservice take some time
because we need to communicate with it over network which add network latency
so using cache here to cache response can improve performance and response time

reduce load on backend service and database
sending call each time to service and database for complex queries which not change more frequently.
can add overhead on underline devices. so caching help here as well storing query data and service response locally
on calling service.

Bandwidth Optimization: services are communicate over network which add network latency. this can be reduce if
we use cache

fault tolerance and resilience = if backend service /underline service get fail the cache can be used as fallback response
for calling service.

Scalability - using distributed caching(redis cache multiple cluster or hazel cast) we can serve multiple request concurrently

CostSaving - as call not goes to underline resource each time the it reduce cpu utilization, memory utilization, reduce IO operation
result in cost saving

DataBase Query Aggregation - caching complex data base queries. help reduce query execution time.

Cache Usage
    1. WeApplication - caching static Data HTML,CSS,javascripts script.
    caching DB query
    2. Microservice - caching API response, caching complex db query result
    3. ecommerce app = caching product catalog and product details and price
Challenges in Cache
    StaleObject issue - if underline resource is update after cache population then it lead to inconsistent data state.
    receiver get inconsistent data.
    Eviction Issue:- as cache has limited memory size we need to Prioritize the data which one to keep and which one to remove.
    if proper eviction strategy not chosen then it can lead to cache thrashing(if cache get full then it will evict the entry automatically
    just before it require again meaning inconsistent eviction happen)
    Cache Miss issue = if required object is not present in cache then call goes to underline resource which can add latency.
    Complexity in distributed cache= as distributed cache has multiple node maintaining consistency across node is challenge.

What are the differences between local caching and distributed caching?
Local Cache
is in memory cache and store memory of single instance of application
Distributed cache - shared among multiple services of application. use centralize and distributed approach if distributed
maintain data consistency across all node
scalability :- we can horizontally scale distributed cache by adding more node. but this is not possible with local
cache as it is cache per instance stays in instance memory
data consistency - as distributed cache can have centralized and distributed approach all nodes of cache share and access
same data. so same data is available for multiple receiver.
in case of Local cache is cache per instance. change is this cache not reflects to other instance cache.
other instance cache may have stale data if this cache get updated.
performance -
Local cache provide higher performance as it is reside in memory of instance
Distributed cache slightly slower compare to local cache because we need to communicate with it over
network which add network latency.
scope and visibility
Local cache scope is limited to single instance of application. it is not visible to other instances
Distributed cache scope is global because it's data shared among multiple services and application
fault tolerance
Local cache if instance get down or crash the local cache will be lost because it reside in memory of instance
Distributed cache provide fault tolerance because if one node get down or lost due to some issue another node is available
which has consistent data.

example of Local cahce
ehcache
caffeine cache
guava cache

example of distributed cache
Redis cache
Memcached
Hazelcast

What factors should you consider when deciding whether to use caching in an application?
read vs write ratio - if reads are more frequent than writes then caching is beneficial
frequency of data access - how frequently that service is getting called if it is getting called frequently then caching is beneficial
data consistency requirement - if data get change frequently and required strong consistency then caching is not beneficial
data size = if data size is large then caching may not be beneficial as it can lead to memory overhead
concurrency and scalability requirement - if application need to scale horizontally then distributed cache is beneficial
data type = if static data which not change frequently then caching is beneficial
user experience requirement - if application need to provide fast response time then caching is beneficial
data access pattern - caching works well static and predictable data.
Type of Application:-  Real time, low latency application benefit from caching
Application where latency is not a concern and it's data access less frequent then caching is not beneficial


Comparing Popular Distributed Caching Solutions:

What are the key differences between Redis, Memcached, and Hazelcast?
When would you favor Redis over Memcached or Hazelcast for a specific use case, and why?
What are the advantages and disadvantages of Memcached compared to Redis?
What use cases would make Hazelcast a better choice than Redis or Memcached?

Caching Architecture and Performance:

How does caching help improve application performance and scalability?
What are the potential risks or downsides of caching in an application?

What is the difference between write-through caching, write-around caching, and write-back caching?
write through cache-
data is updated in both cache and underline resource sequentially.
whenever data is update it is update in cache first and then immediately update in underline resource.
it maintain data consistency between cache and underline resource. both cache and underline resource are in sync.
advantage
fast reads are there as cache is always updated
have data consistency between cache and underline resource
disadvantage
Particularly slow writes- as each time cache needs to update first and underline resource get update. which slow write
operation.
Higher DataBase load:- each time write happen if there are multiple writes then cache update happen and cache need to update
database each time which can add overhead on database.
Example use case
Session storage= session storage. session data must be consistent across multiple server
Critical System = system which need strong consistency between cache and underline resource
in ecommerce website if product stock is updated then it should be consistent across all server

write around cache
it first write to underlying resource and cache get updated only when get call happen
at time of gate call if entry not present in cache call goes to db or any resource to fetch the data.
data that is getting access frequently that will get store in cache. data which get access less frequently may not
get added into cache
Advantage
Writes are faster - as write happen directly to underline resource so write operation is fast
Reduce cache churn - data that is less frequently access may not get store in cache which save cache memory from
utilization
Disadvantage
Frequent Cash Miss - for get call if data is not present in cache then frequent cache miss will happen which eventually slower the
read performance
Data Inconsistency - As less frequently access data may not be cached. this create inconsistency between cache and underline resource
can have stale data in cache
Example use case
Written Intensive application - where frequent write operation happen and read operation is less frequent
Cost-effective cache - system where caching less frequently access data is not very desirable choice in case of performance
and cost optimization.

write back cache
it first write to cache and later asynchronously write to underlying resource after some interval(using flushing mechanism. when cache evict happen)
instead of write multiple time for same data in underlying resource it write the state changes of same data in cache and the consolidate it. and asynchronously
write to underlying resource.
Advantage
Faster writes -as writes are happen to cache first and then they are consolidate to one write and write to underlying resource
asynchronously
reduce load on underlying resource - as multiple writes from cache consolidated in one and the write to db so less write perform on db
which reduce load on it
Disadvantage-
    data loss can happen - if cache get crash before writing to db then data loss can happen
    complexity - required addition mechanism to maintain data consistency between cache and underline resource
    handling failures or flushing of data to underline resource
    Example:-
    write heavy workload - system with frequent updates and writes are very critical
    Analytics system - system where eventual consistency required and write to db asynchronously is acceptable
    use case
    a game Leaderboard system - where frequent score updates happen and eventual consistency is acceptable

Implementation of Distributed Cache Using Spring Framework:
Redis Integration with Spring:

How do you configure a Redis-based cache in a Spring Boot project?
use dependencies
spring-boot-starter-cache - cache annotation support
spring-boot-starter-data-redis - redis server connection
io.lettuce.core - redis client
@EnableCaching on spring Boot Application
In appconfig class
create RedisConnection Factory bean(return new LettuceConnectionFactory()) - to create connection with redis server
RedisTemplate - for setting connectFactory and setting Key and value serializer
for key StringRedisSerializer
for Value GenericJackson2JsonRedisSerializer
in app.yml
spring.data.redis.host=localhost
spring.data.redis.port=6379
spring.data.redis.password=yourpassword(if any)
spring.data.redis.connection-timeout=2000
use of
@Cacheable- which load data from cache if present otherwise call goes to actual method or resource
@CachePut - it is used to update cache data when ever call made to method.
@CacheEvict - clear cache.

What are @Cacheable and @CacheEvict annotations in Spring? Provide examples of how these annotations can be used with Redis.
How does Spring Boot handle serialization for storing data in Redis? How can you customize serialization/deserialization in your Redis cache implementation?

Practical Scenario Questions:

How would you implement a distributed cache using Redis in Spring Boot to cache results of a database query that frequently changes?


Eviction Strategies and TTL Configuration:
Eviction Strategy Concepts:

Explain the differences between Least Recently Used (LRU), Least Frequently Used (LFU), and First-In-First-Out (FIFO) eviction strategies.
LRU - first it prioritize cache data based on order of usage and evict data accordingly.
the cache data which used not used recently will be evicted from cache first.
use case webpage caching, session storage.
LFU - LeastFrequentlyUsed it prioritize cache data based on count of usage and evict data accordingly.
meaning data which is less frequently access get remove first
use case content recommendation system, database
FIFO - FirstInFirstOut it prioritize cache data based on order of addition in cache and evict data accordingly.
use case queue mechanism, simple static data caching

In which scenarios is each eviction strategy preferred?
if you want to cache simple static data we can use FIFO strategy. provide simple queue mechanism to evict data.
if you want cache should be prioritize on order of usage then Least strategy is preferred. suppose
you want to clear the session from cache which is used recently then we can use
if we want to prioritize the cache based on count of cached data access then we can use LFU strategy.
product catalog is frequently accessed by multiple user

How can eviction strategies impact performance?
if we not use correct eviction strategy then it can lead to cache thrashing
which creat lot of cache miss and ultimately degrade performance




Practical Scenario Questions on Eviction/TTL:

Given an application with hundreds of microservices generating cache-heavy workloads, what eviction strategy would you use for distributed caching, and why?
LRU and LFU strategy is preferred for microservice architecture
lets take example of ecommerce product catalog is frequently accessed by multiple user
so we need to use Least frequently use strategy because product catalog is frequently accessed by multiple user
here we need to count the usage of cache data and prioritize accordingly
suppose we need to cache some static data such product images we can use fifo strategy idle for simple static data
suppose we need to cache user session data which get change frequently and need to be evict after some time least recently use strategy is preferred
Describe how you would configure dynamic TTL for user session data stored in Redis.
we can use redis set command to dynamically set ttl
redisTemplate.opsForValue().set("sessionKey", sessionData, Duration.ofMinutes(30));

Implementing Local Caching in JVM (On-Heap and Off-Heap):
Local Caching Concepts:

What is the difference between on-heap and off-heap caching in JVM?
on-heap caching - store cache data in java heap memory basically use JAVA heap memory for caching.
Advantages: Fast in reads as it is inside JVM memory
Simple implementation as it use JVM memory no extract configuration required
Disadvantages -
can't have large data to cache in JVM due small in size of heap memory
Garbage collection overhead - as cache reside in heap memory it can add overhead on garbage collection process

Off-heap caching - store cache outside the JVM memory meaning on shared memory or direct memory(os memory) or filesystem
Advantages
large cache size compare to on-heap memory can store large data
garbage collection overhead is removed here
Disadvantage
    provide little bit more latency compare to on-heap
    need additional configuration to setup off-heap cache
What are the advantages of using off-heap caching over on-heap caching?
provide large caching size and avoid garbage collection overhead
How do you handle memory overflow in local caching?
What libraries or tools can you use to implement local caching for a JVM application?
 on heap caching- concurrentHasMap, hazelcast, ehcache, caffeine cache, guava cache
 off-heap caching - ehcache(need to explicitly configure off-heap), caffeine cache(need to explicitly configure off-heap)

Practical Local Caching Questions:

How would you implement pure on-heap caching in a Java application?
using concurrentHashMap or ehcache or caffeine cache or guava cache.

How would you configure local off-heap caching in a Spring Boot application?
need to add org.ehcache dependency, spring boot starter data cache dependency, spring boot starter spring context support dependency
@EnableCaching on @SpringBootApplication class
I configured ehcache programmatically in app config class
Create EhcCacheProvider bean using Caching.getCachingProvider()(type EhcacheCachingProvider)
create a CachingConfiguration object and add ResoucePoolsBuilder.newResourcePoolsBuilde().offHeap(100,MemoryUnit.MB) to it.
then create Configuration object of Ehcache and set cacheConfiguration object to it with cache name.
create CacheManager bean and initialize it with above configuration object.
then return new JcacheCacheManager(cacheManager) from CacheManager bean method.
then use Spring cache annotation such as @cacheable, @CacheEvict, @CachePut on service method to use cache.


What techniques can be used to measure and optimize memory usage in local caching?
use of monitoring tools like JMX, Micrometer, VisualVM

key concept to take in consideration choosing on-heap and off-heap caching

cache use and performance-
eviction policy- selection of proper eviction policy is important to avoid cache thrashing and improve performance
concurrency - if multiple thread access cache concurrently then need to use concurrent data structure like concurrentHashMap
JVM tuning - for on-heap caching need to tune JVM heap memory size and garbage collection parameters
Monitoring - need to monitor cache usage and cache eviction metrics to optimize cache performance by using tool like
JMX, Micrometer.


**Advanced Local Caching:

What is SoftReference and WeakReference in Java? How can they be used for local caching optimizations?
it is used in on-heap caching to avoid memory overflow issue.
softReference - it is  remove by garbage collector when there is JVM full I we need to free up memory
weekReference - whenever garbage collector thread runs weakReference object are deleted from JVM.




Troubleshooting and Optimization:
Debugging and Monitoring Cache Usage:

How would you monitor and troubleshoot cache performance issues in a distributed system?
elk metrics
elk logs
metrics monitoring tool like prometheus, grafana
What tools can you use to monitor Redis or Hazelcast cache metrics in real time?
redis cli
elk
matrix monitoring tool


eviction policy of
Redis - by default its none
we can configure it
volatile-lru - keys with ttl which are least recently used are evicted first
allkey-lru - keys irrespective off ttl which are least recently used are evicted first
volatile-lfu - keys with ttl which are least frequently used are evicted first
allkey-lfu - keys irrespective off ttl which are least frequently used are evicted first
volatile-random - keys with ttl are evicted randomly
allkey-random - keys irrespective off ttl are evicted randomly

Memcached - by default it support LRU eviction policy
Hazelcast by default none but after configuration it support LRU and LFU eviction policy

// this all question should be skipped
//skip
What strategies can you use to debug TTL or eviction problems in your caching implementation?

//skip
Describe how you'd handle cache preloading for local caches in JVM.

Optimization Questions:

What are the most common performance bottlenecks encountered in caching systems, and how do you resolve them?

How can you reduce cache thrashing or the risk of cache stampede?

//skip
Failure Mitigation:

Explain cache poisoning and how you can protect against it in your caching setup.
How can you design a fallback mechanism for cache miss scenarios?
What happens when a distributed caching system fails, and how would you mitigate such failures in production?

Practical Exercises:
Write a simple Spring Boot application that integrates Redis as a cache and uses @Cacheable and @CacheEvict annotations.
Implement an LRU cache using Java without relying on external libraries (e.g., using a combination of HashMap and LinkedHashSet).
Compare a distributed caching setup using Redis vs. Hazelcast in terms of scalability, fault tolerance, and throughput under simulated high loads.
Configure a Hazelcast cluster in a Spring project and demonstrate its peer-to-peer synchronization capabilities.
Write a TTL-based caching mechanism for cache expiration, demonstrating automatic eviction after configurable time windows.
Advanced Topics for Senior-Level Preparation:

Caching for Complex Systems:
How would you design a multi-layered caching mechanism for an e-commerce application (local, distributed, and database query cache)?

How do you handle cache consistency in distributed systems when underlying data changes frequently?

What are the CAP theorem principles applicable to distributed caching? How do caching systems preserve availability and partition tolerance?

These questions and exercises should help you prepare thoroughly for your assessment and provide both theoretical and practical exposure for a senior software role. Focus on creating sample applications and working with real datasets to solidify your understanding
//need to skip
Hazelcast Integration with Spring:

How do you configure a Hazelcast-based cache in a Spring application?
Can Hazelcast operate in a peer-to-peer cluster mode? How is this configuration achieved using Spring?
What are some Hazelcast configuration options to optimize performance in a Spring application?
Describe and implement a caching strategy for a user authentication process using Hazelcast in Spring Boot.

//skip
TTL (Time-to-Live) Concepts:

What is TTL in caching, and why is it important?
How can you configure TTL in Redis and Hazelcast caches?
Provide an example of how to use custom TTL settings in Spring Boot for Redis.
What are the potential consequences of setting a TTL value too high or too low?